Hi. This is a video to talk about Pali. My
own experience learning the ancient language,
the most important for the history of Buddhism,
called Pali. It's especially important for
Theravada Buddhism, it's important for anyone
who is interested in Buddhist philosophy.
It is a language that has important links
to many living languages in India, in Sri
Lanka, in Southeast Asia (Burmese, Thai, Cambodian,
etc.). This is a video that, obviously, people
have requested that I make for some time.
Why am I finally making it today? Well, funny
story, 30 minutes ago, my final exam for Japanese
ended. The end of my level 1 Japanese university
course. I am completely exhausted. I woke
up at about 6:00 AM this morning, I wrote
a two and a half hour exam. The reason why
I've got a beard is because I'm exhausted,
I've been studying a lot, and burning the
candle at both ends. That's the first part
of the answer to the question, "How do you
learn Pali?" Like any other language, it is
a lot of work. It is a lot of hard work. But
the truth is, if I don't make a video when
I'm exhausted, I won't make a video at all,
because if I were well-rested, I would be
getting work done. So, in most of my videos
I look exhausted, and in most of my new videos
in the future I'm going to continue to look
exhausted, because that's when I set aside
the time to try to make a video and share
some of my thoughts and memories with y'all.
My patron saint behind me (in case you don't
recognize him), that's Edward Snowden, looking
down over me. So you might have been expecting
a Buddha statue in the background, but no,
I don't have that kind of stuff in my apartment.
In terms of what gets covered in this video:
number 1, I'm going to talk about some of
my positive experiences with learning Pali
as a language, with being a Pali scholar.
That's something I was, in as much as anyone
can exist as a Pali scholar, for years and
years, and I do have some positive experiences
to share. Just lately, in some e-mail correspondence,
I was made aware of the fact that almost all
of my writing online consists of warnings
for people learning Pali. Not necessarily
negative, but trying to warn you of dangers
and difficulties you're going to encounter,
and a lot of my writing about my own life
gives a lot of emphasis to the sense of frustration,
failure, disaffection, insuperable obstacles
that I encountered and that I expect others
will encounter in that field. So, in this
video, to start with, I'm actually going to
say some positive stuff about my experience,
secondly I'm going to talk about the central
question of the work itself, "How do you learn
Pali?", "How do you teach yourself Pali?".
It is mostly going to be about teaching yourself
Pali because there are very few places in
the world where someone else can teach it
to you. You're expected to be an autodidact
absolutely everywhere, including Europe, Asia,
etc. And then Part 3: I'm going to give some
thoughts about why I quit. Why I'm no longer
a Pali scholar today. So this is going to
be one long video. And it will be very interesting
to a small number of people, admittedly. If
you're seriously interested in Buddhism, if
you're seriously interested in why so few
people are really competent in Pali, why there
is so little new, original research coming
out, this is a good video to watch, and if
you're considering this as an option for yourself,
of course, this is a good video to watch also.
A small number of people who know me personally
may also find it interesting, or they may
not. Arright. The positive side of my experience
study Pali, which I never talk about. I never
want to sound like I'm boasting, and one of
the reciprocal aspects of that is that there
are people on the internet and in real life,
too, face-to-face, there are people who denounce
me by claiming that I was never given access
to institutions that I was given access to,
by claiming that people never worked with
me or never could work with me who did work
with me. A lot of people, especially before
this Youtube channel started, a lot of people
would basically invent an imaginary character
for who they thought I was and they would
then attack that character, or invent reasons
in their own minds for what they thought were
my failures or my obstacles or why I couldn't
accomplish various things. And very often
what they were attacking me for failing to
accomplish were things I never wanted to accomplish
at all. And, of course, that's partly because
my own approach to the history is very sincere
but it is very realistic. I am not someone
who ever owned magical crystals. I've never
owned amethysts. I've never done Yoga. I don't
smoke marijuana. I am not a stereotypical
hippie involved in Buddhism in any way. I'm
not interested in glorifying the past. I have
a real, sincere interest in a lot of important
historical issues, like slavery and colonialism
and the opium trade, and I'm sincerely interested
in the ancient history of Buddhism, I'm sincerely
interested in the modern, contemporary, ongoing
history of Buddhism, but I'm interested in
real things. I want to deal with reality all
the time, and that does alienate me from most
of the people in the field, and that's why,
both on the internet and in real life, a lot
of those people say bad things about me. I
hope you can tell, even from my tone of voice,
I really don't resent it. As I'm about to
say in talking about the positive side of
it that didn't create a problem for me in
the field, because the types of events and
institutions and opportunities that those
people would block me from are opportunities
I don't want. They're things I don't want
to be a part of. So, y'know, I don't feel
any sense of loss that I wasn't invited to
events that I would have refused to attend,
or that I would have just quietly avoided
ever attending. And the other side of that
is, these people who kind of put in the effort
or energy to try to hate me (and I just note,
hate is different from fear: there are people
who fear me and there are people who hate
me, those are two different things), those
people are really unaware that all over the
world I had the red carpet rolled out for
me, simply because I was a legit Pali scholar.
What does it mean to be a legit Pali scholar?
Some people judged me on the basis of my hand-writing.
I worked very hard on this language, and it
is not a spoken language, not a living language
you can really have a conversation in; I had
beautiful penmanship, and I don't mean writing
Pali in Romanized letters, I don't mean using
the same alphabet we use for English, y'know
I could read and write Pali in the Burmese
tradition, in the Sinhalese tradition (i.e.,
the tradition from Sri Lanka), Thai, Lao,
Cambodian, and I also worked on some of the
minority scripts, because I was interested
in the orthography. So, branching off from
the word orthography, what were the positive
things I had happen to me, just by being a
legit Pali scholar? Just by teaching myself
the language, working very hard, putting up
a website, developing good handwriting, developing
a deep knowledge of the history, the literature
(again, I'm reading reading contemporary studies,
I'm reading ancient materials, I'm reading
all kinds of stuff), what doors did that open
for me? The stuff I cared about, again, it's
not some meditation retreat at a hippie institution
where people hate me, those were not the opportunities
I was looking for. What was rewarding for
me and the doors that were opened for me was:
I got to see stone inscriptions, in person,
I got to see palm-leaf manuscripts, I got
to visit archives, and I don't just mean academic
archives, although that was also very rewarding
for me (all over the world, in Asia, in Europe,
I've seen important historical materials in
academic archives), I've seen archives inside
Buddhist monasteries, I've seen archives inside
museums and so on, too. I've had access to
wonderful, inspiring historical materials,
hands-on. That mattered to me. Those were
the doors that were opened for me. Those were
the people who respected me. Some of them
were individual scholars who knew me for years
and who respected my work (however you want
to characterize my work). People who were
experts and devoted their lives to this stuff
met me, got to know me at conferences, sometimes
at archives; some of the most important people
I met (I was spending all this time at archives),
I met those people at the archives. Some of
them stayed in touch with me by e-mail for
years and years, others were people who met
me for 5 minutes once. Show up at a Buddhist
monastery, y'know, not just average Buddhist
monasteries, but a Buddhist monastery where
I knew there was some kind of scholarly or
historical tradition that was important, that
I wanted to connect with, and y'know, the
monks looked at my hand-writing, they looked
at my work, they asked about my background,
you have some kind of conversation about Buddhism,
and they unlock the door to whatever it is.
You know, I was treated wonderfully at such
a long list of institutions. Again, I don't
get offended when people denounce me this
way on the internet; people say, "Oh, nobody
in western academia could ever work with this
guy." And again, this is before [I was on]
Youtube, so people would imagine that I was
this very scary character. [They had] never
heard my voice. I guess they found the textbooks
I made, the practical resources, they found
that scary, I don't know. Most of it is pretty
boring. Yeah, my work on Pali grammar, pretty
terrifying. You know, I had an offer to get
a PhD, I've had offers, plural, to get PhDs
in England, in Germany, in the United States,
famous universities like Stanford in the United
States… one of the things you can get out
of Google [is that] I did deliver this one
lecture at Oxford university in the U.K. If
I had stayed longer at Cambridge I would have
delivered a lecture at Cambridge (I had to
leave, I went to Cambodia, so I didn't stay
long enough for that to happen). I delivered
a lecture at S.O.A.S. in London. When I first
got involved in Pali, when I first decided
that it was really Pali that was the language
that I was going to study, not Sanskrit, not
something else, not Mongolian, y'know, I made
a list of who were the major figures in the
field who were still alive that I'd like to
meet, that I'd like to contact or communicate
with. And much more quickly than I ever thought
would have been possible, I met all of those
people. Really, when I was still a beginner,
I remember when the last person came off my
list, and I had to stop and reflect, "Wow,
now every single person on my list I've either
spoken to in person, or I've had significant
e-mail correspondence with them over a long
time." There were people who were not on that
list who I did meet and who I benefited from
meeting. Again, so, the positive part of my
experience is (and this is what I'm trying
to share with you, whoever is viewing this),
if you are willing to do the work to become
some kind of legit Pali scholar, where you
have something to show your legitimacy, which
can be great hand-writing, it can be that
you've done surveys of manuscript material,
you just got back from looking at stone inscriptions,
you've done something that shows your legitimacy,
your sincerity, your hard work, your dedication,
your ability, your talent, your intelligence,
if you can show that, and you're not an eccentric,
you're not insane, you're not corrupt, you're
not a cult leader, because many people in
this field are some of those things, if you've
got that, my experience is, many many institutions
rolled out the red carpet for me, and treated
me extremely well. And I mean everywhere:
in Canada, in Taiwan, in Thailand, some of
these being elite, closed, Buddhist monastic
institutions. I was only in Bangkok for a
couple of days and on the basis of my reputation
as it was way back then, back when I had just
one small [web]site talking about how to teach
yourself Pali on the internet, on the basis
of that website and maybe one or two causal
articles, I got an invitation to go and meet
the most senior, scholarly monks at the Marble
Temple in Bangkok. That is an elite institution
and I'm not going to say it's hard for anyone
to go there, I think anyone, if they want
to see the architecture, can arrange to have
a tour, but to get the invitation I got at
that institution is not easy. And it was easy
for me, just for those reasons. When I was
in Sri Lanka, I thanked the people involved
profusely, when I was in Sri Lanka I stayed
in the same Buddhist monastery that used to
be the home of Bhikkhu Bodhi. When I was in
the United States I met Bhikkhu Bodhi, I talked
to him for many hours, it was about a week,
I forget it was 5 days or what, it was a seven
day retreat [or something]. I talked to Bhikkhu
Bodhi about his life, about studying Pali,
about Buddhism, about all these things. Y'know,
Bhikkhu Bodhi is as famous as anyone gets
in this field. All these institutions, y'know,
in that sense, I had a wonderful experience,
and I went into this as someone whose only
university degree is in Political Science.
I don't have a university degree in Buddhism.
And, as mentioned, that's one of the things
that makes me very different from other people
in the field. I remember I read someone's
PhD thesis about Southern Laos. Laos is already
a small enough country but it had a long period
of time when it was split into three kingdoms.
This was a PhD thesis about the Southernmost
Kingdom. And this PhD thesis referred to it
as "a magical kingdom", as a wonderful place,
as this sort of paradise on earth. Y'know…
when I look at the history of that same kingdom,
I see slavery, I see the opium trade, I see
the elephant trade. Yeah, there were rice
fields, but really the main cash economy had
to do with capturing slaves and capturing
elephants. That doesn't mean I'm anti-Lao,
on the contrary, I devoted years of my life
to studying the history and politics of Laos,
ancient as well as modern, as well as colonial
era. I was very interested in all of it, but
whether I'm looking at Buddhism in its strictest
definition or I'm looking at a Buddhist society,
I don't have those rose-colored glasses on.
I'm looking at what's really there, slavery
and all, wars and all, hypocrisies and all.
Hell and the devil and all; I've mentioned
in some of my other videos, one of the biggest
mind-games that gets played by Western Buddhists
is pretending that hell isn't in the Pali
canon. So I've had, in many ways, an enormously
positive reaction; I've had a lot of rewards
for the effort I put into studying Pali, teaching
myself Pali. Now, to give one example of that,
Richard Gombrich, who is still alive (he has
retired), Richard Gombrich is absolutely one
of the most famous and powerful and influential
people in the Western study of Theravada Buddhism.
He was not on my list of people I was really
trying to meet, honestly. I liked his first
book, I had mixed feelings about his later
books, I'm a critic of some of his work, I'm
appreciative of some of his work. He was giving
a lecture in Bangkok and I went to this lecture.
And, y'know, I'm trying to only tell you the
positive side here, there are a lot of negative
things I could say; this lecture in Bangkok,
the whole conference demonstrated many of
the things that are fundamentally wrong with
the study of Theravada Buddhism in the 21st
century. But Richard Gombrich was there, and
he gave an excellent lecture. When the other
speakers were giving their lectures, Gombrich
was sitting to one side (he was on stage,
but not at the podium). And I remember, I
won't name who this is (a senior professor
with a PhD who teaches in Europe), was giving
a lecture talking about Pali manuscripts,
palm-leaf manuscripts. And I did not say anything
to challenge her, I did not say anything to
disagree with her, but when question period
came, I asked a question, and from the framing
of the question, the phrasing and presentation
of the question, it was obvious that I actually
knew this material, and I hate to say it,
but, it was pretty obvious that she did not.
Although she had read a well-prepared script
that was, ultimately, just summarizing other
people's research, she responded to my question,
having a very shrill voice, freaking out on
stage, and saying immediately (she didn't
know who I was), "Well, obviously, you know
much more about this subject than I do, so
perhaps you can answer your own question".
This is supposed to be an academic conference.
Of course, she's scowling, and very negative,
and she never said a word to me again in my
life (neither by e-mail nor face-to-face),
and I had not said anything to disagree with
her or challenge her. But the one person there,
of course, who really responded positively,
Richard Gombrich brightens up and looks at
me, and you could see him ask the person [next
to him], "Who is this guy? This guy knows
what he's talking about!" So that's the positive
aspect of it. A lot of people hate and fear
Richard Gombrich (and, again, hatred and fear
are two different things). I think they hate
him for all the wrong reasons. Maybe they
fear him for the right reasons. If you're
a fraud, Richard Gombrich can expose you as
a fraud. And, in a sense, in a really low-key
way, that was what had just happened [with
the professor who became angry at me] at that
conference. But Richard Gombrich saw me there,
he immediately recognized that I was not just
a talent, but someone who really had hands-on
experience, who had done the hard work, studying
the language, studying the materials, being
out in the field. He invited me to dinner
that night. We spoke continuously that one
night, y'know, the conference ended relatively
early, academic conferences don't run until
late hours of the night, so we talked for
hours, right then, the minute the conference
ended, and then he went to his hotel room
briefly to freshen up, then we went to dinner,
we talked for hours that night. Later, I met
up with him in England; he invited me to give
this lecture and said very flattering things
[about it]. Ironically, (now, I'm only supposed
to talk about the positive things) ironically
there was a period of time when people in
Buddhist Studies hated me and said bad things
about me because I friends with Richard Gombrich.
So because this professor likes me, other
people hate me, because they think, "Oh, now
he's on Gombrich's side, those two are together".
At that very conference, just when I was first
chatting with Gombrich, saying, "Oh, yeah,
y'know, I live in Laos, this is the kind of
research I've been doing, this is the type
of work I've done the last couple of years";
just standing there in the hallway, the other
professors who were there, the other professors
and graduate students, a couple of PhD students,
stood in a group apart from me and Gombrich
in silence, in invidious silence, y'know,
fuming. And [they] didn't say a word to us.
And Gombrich, of course, he's a very self-confident
guy, I remember, he turned to them, and, with
a somewhat beatific and yet challenging smile,
sort of smiled at them, like, "Are any of
you even going to try to talk to me?" He was
right to give them the opportunity to come
over and talk to him: he's the leading figure
in this field, in the field the conference
was about. At that conference he's the most
senior, most experienced most knowledgeable
person, [and] nobody wants to talk to him
except me, because nobody has the guts. And,
look, why do I have the guts? Why did I have
the guts to talk to these people? Because
unlike most people who come out of the British
academic system, I was honest with everybody.
Sorry, one digression leads to another, but
I'm giving you here a lot of the positive,
rewarding aspects of what studying Pali is
like, what it's all about. Don't lie to anyone
about your ability, your accomplishments,
your background. If you're an autodidact,
if you taught yourself, be honest about that,
whatever it is, be "up front", because the
British in general are not, and that's what
you're distinguishing yourself from. Whether
or not you have a PhD, whatever your academic
background is. I remember I once spoke to
a very passionate Sri Lankan guy (who knew
a lot about Buddhism and cared a lot about
Buddhism), we had this conversation about
the history of Pali as a language, about the
state of the literature, and he found me to
be extremely well-informed and learned and
he was very interested in what I had to say.
He said, "Tell me, what textbook are you using
to teach yourself Pali?" Now because I was
really on the grind all the time, I was working
hard, I was studying while I was on the bus,
y'know, I was passionate about this language
and this area of studies, [so] I had it in
a pocket in my jacket. "Here's the textbook",
I could show it to him, and this guy, he's
Sri Lankan, he's not a Pali scholar, but he's
a knowledgeable guy, he rapidly leafs through
this, and he says, "This is much too basic,
this is much too introductory; based on this
conversation, you must be far more advanced
than this by now." And my reply, in that moment,
with no pause, no hesitation, I looked him
in the eye and said, "No, actually, I'm on
page 25 of that textbook, but I know the first
24 pages exceedingly well." Don't be a fraud:
be real with people. If you're passionate
about something and you're a beginner, tell
people you're passionate about it and you're
a beginner. When you get to be more intermediate,
be honest about what your intermediate level
skills are and so on. And part of the reward
for that is that people will help you in a
way that's suitable to your level, and, hey,
people are going to hate you anyway. In this
day and age, I get hatred on the internet,
I think all those other people, I think they
get plenty of hatred on the internet, too.
So, y'know, it's not that you can't win, it's
that you can win, and you're also going to
have a lot of unreasonable criticism. So it's
part of the game. And, look, there are wonderful
things about that side of the game, too. As
I just mentioned, I started off with that
list of people I wanted to meet. If e-mail
didn't exist it would have been very hard
for me to meet any of those people or I would
have just met them once in person, when they
happened to be in Cambodia, when they happened
to be in Laos, [or] these other places I was
living, and then I would have never crossed
paths with them again. E-mail allowed you
to maintain those contacts. And sometimes
you meet people who introduce you to other
people. Okay, look, that's the positive, wonderful
side of studying Pali. If you do the hard
work, if you're not a fraud, if you're honest
with yourself and you're honest with other
people, if you're a sincere scholar, even
as a totally self-made scholar, and you're
smart, you're not crazy, you're not trying
to start a cult, all kinds of institutions
will open doors for you. And the institutions
that don't open doors for you, the people
who try to avoid you, try to have sympathy
for them, a lot of the time they have something
to hide. [This is] not only my experience,
I've talked to other people who were reasonably
advanced in Pali, where they talked to me
about their experience, they went to see a
Buddhist monk, [and] as soon as it became
clear that this person, the visitor, knew
more Pali than the Buddhist monk, suddenly
the whole mood changes and doors get closed,
and nobody wants to put up with you. Even
in an academic setting, several times I went
and met with professors and then as soon as
it became clear what I had accomplished and
what level I was at (which can come out in
funny ways when you're talking to a professor),
then they didn't want to be in the same room
with me any more. I remember one university,
all of the professors (they had a big department
of Buddhist Studies), all of the professors
who were really confident in their area of
expertise (the specialists on ancient Chinese
literature, Chinese Buddhism, Japanese Buddhism,
Korean Buddhism, whatever their field was),
the ones who were really confident in their
languages and so on, met with me, and they
had looked at my work and my C.V. and were
happy to talk to me, they offered to publish
my work, they offered to take me on as a graduate
student, y'know, as I say, they kind of rolled
out the red carpet, it was wonderful. But
the one professor at that same university
who never met with me, who never responded
to any e-mails from me, was the one professor
who was supposed to be specialized in Pali.
And I sympathize, to some extent, but probably
that guy didn't want to talk to me because
he looked at the materials I'd sent and he
probably felt afraid that I was a challenge
to his authority. That, or he may also have
had supernatural beliefs that made him uncomfortable
meeting me. That's also part of the game.
Part two. I said there were three parts to
this discussion. I'm glad I did part one,
though, because most of the material you'll
read from me on the internet is very negative,
is warning you about how hard this road is
to walk, how little there is waiting for you
when you get to the end of the road, and the
problems you're going to encounter on the
way. Part two, learning the language. Look,
I had no teacher for this language. I met
Bhikkhu Bodhi, I spent time with all kinds
of Buddhist monks, nobody helped me learn
the language. Nobody even gave me advice,
except for, I guess, negative advice, telling
me, "Oh, this institution is a scam, this
one is bad," that kind of steering-down-the-road.
The number one mistake I made, my number one
regret was that when I started working on
the language, I was working on poetry. My
line of reasoning for this, it was partly
based on what I'd read about Sanskrit, about
methods of teaching yourself Sanskrit and
the historical tradition of how people transmitted
and practiced these languages within India
(ancient India, of course). I thought the
best way for me to be able to study Pali 24/7
would be to memorize short passages of poetry,
to pick up that vocabulary and then to be
able to go over those poems with a fine-toothed
comb and take apart the grammar and so on.
So that's not a totally stupid idea, it's
not a terrible idea, but I regret it. I wasted…
in my first year I wasted so much time and
effort because I was working on the poetry.
What you really want to work on within Pali
when you're getting started ideally is a chrestomathy,
a selection of passages, of very plainly-written
narrative. I mean, I can remember, so I'd
been working on poetry for some time, and
then I opened the Pali canon, I was reading
a particular passage [that] interested me
for whatever philosophical reason, and [there]
was just this incredibly simple sentence,
where it said something like, "And then the
Buddha came down the mountain and walked along
the road that led to the river, and there
was a small army-town there." Reading that,
it's kind of ridiculous to say, but I felt
like I was reading English, in contrast to
the way the language is used in the poetry,
the expression was so simple and so clear
and so lucid, and, y'know, this was such a
contrast. When you are first learning the
language that is the type of material (from
within the Pali canon) that you want to be
reading. Naturally, if you're interested in
the philosophy, you may want to immediately
start with reading dense philosophical passages,
[but] you can't do that with any language.
You can't do that with French or Dutch or
German. If you're learning Italian you can't
start with dense philosophical passages or
dogmatic religious statements. What you really
need to work on is that boring, practical,
narrative use of the language, which is almost
all going to be 3rd person, past tense, "He
walked down the road". I've done a lot of
work… the reason why most people… well,
okay, a large percentage of people who know
me on the internet know me because I made
textbooks available as PDFs, I worked very
hard to make educational materials available
so that other people could study Pali. You
can get that, if you don't already know, if
you google my name, you can get it various
ways. Within Google Books I digitized some
of them so that within the Google Books framework
it'll be permanently available, you can download
the PDFs, and [also] through different websites
that I don't update any more, you can also
download those. Some people have used them
for years. The textbooks I made, I'm aware,
because I speak to Buddhist monks and I get
e-mails from Buddhist monks, and I've seen
it mentioned in print in various places, the
resources I made to help people learn Pali
have been used by Buddhist monks in Nepal,
in Hong Kong, in Myanmar, in Taiwan, around
the world. And, of course, I assume they're
predominantly used by people who speak English,
because they're in English. I've had some
indication that somebody in Russia is using
my work, which is great, they never talk to
me, whoever the Russians are. Obviously, some
of those languages, there's not that much
available for people who are serious about
learning Pali. The lowest level of pedestrian
communication in the language, in some ways
the most boring use of the language, is what
you really need to work on when you're first
starting. And you're not going to find that
prepared for you, you're going to have to
have a copy of the Pali canon and, in effect,
prepare your own selections, find passages
that you can read and study that use the language
in that direct, narrative way, not philosophy,
not poetry, other types of stuff. One of the
other things I'm known for is the emphasis
that all of my materials give to orthography,
to the writing systems. You need to be able
to read Pali comparatively in more than one
edition. So, right off the bat, develop the
ability to read Pali in Burmese script, in
Cambodian script, in Sinhalese script (the
script of Sri Lanka), develop the ability
to have open in front of you more than one
paper book with more than one version of the
Pali canon, of whatever Pali text you happen
to be reading, so that you can do comparative
reading between them. What does that win you?
What do you get for that? … I remember talking
about this with Richard Gombrich, I remember
talking about this with a list of professors.
I mean, some of the professors, I remember
talking to one professor who I won't name,
and, y'know, the questions he was asking me,
even though he himself had a PhD and was (in
theory) teaching Pali at a graduate level,
a lot of the questions he asked me I would
have taught in a 101 course, in a Pali 101
course, they were really basic subjects, basic
questions of where the books come from, which
books to use, basic questions you need to
know to do any research or just to study the
language itself. And I appreciated his honesty
that he would ask me those questions, and
I was happy to answer them for him. This is
one of the other problems with learning Pali,
most of university programs will just waste
a lot of your time. They may give you an irrelevant
education in Hinduism, in Sanskrit, if you're
in a program of Religious Studies you may
spend a lot of your time debating Max Weber
and the history of Protestantism, and theoretical
ideas about the study of religion in academia.
It's not a complete waste of time, but it
is an obstruction to you actually doing the
work of becoming a Pali scholar. And this
is one of the reasons why many people who
have PhDs related to Pali don't have any of
the practical knowledge or skills or experience
that I managed to get in just my first few
years. They haven't been out living in "the
jungle" (the jungle in quotation marks)…
I spent some time literally in the jungle,
when I was in North-Western Laos… but, they
haven't been out in Southeast Asia or Sri
Lanka doing hands-on work. Nor, in their own
apartments, are they sitting alone with the
books open hitting the language heavily. They're
generally spending their time coping with
harassment within a Western academic program.
Spending a lot of their time and energy managing
the mood-swings of their supervisor, [of]
the other grad students, and attending lectures
that, again, lectures that may be related
to Asian Studies, or Religious Studies, or
may address theoretical questions that are
currently fashionable, may have a lot of talk
about Foucault or whatever the current, trendy
philosopher-theoretician is, but they're not
doing the work. And they're also not really
going to be receiving instruction in the language,
in the real praxis of reading and writing
and studying the language. So whether you're
in an academic situation or not, whether you're
in a Buddhist monastery or not (because some
people watching this may be Buddhist monks
in monasteries, thinking, "Yeah, I want to
do better than this Canadian guy"), 99% of
the work is going to be you, alone, as an
autodidact. I met, face-to-face, some of the
last Buddhist monks to really be products
of the old education system in Pali. That's
partly because I did all of this research
on [Pali grammatical textbooks], on the history
of pedagogy for the language. This raises
a number of interesting subjects that may
be useful for people to hear about. I met
one Buddhist monk, he was an older guy, I
guess he was 55 or 60 when I met him; when
he was about 8 years old, he studied with
the last traditional master of the Pali language
in Sri Lanka, who was then a monk of more
than 90 years old. So that guy I met, he was
one of the last links to the old ways from
the old days for how Buddhist monks used to
learn Pali. It's gone. When you meet Buddhist
monks, or Asian people, Asian laypeople who
grew up in a Buddhist society, if they have
mastered the Pali language, and they're under
90 years of age, I guarantee you they learned
Pali pretty much the same way I did. And the
textbooks they use, even if they're not directly
using western textbooks, you'll be surprised
to find if you look into the educational materials,
which I did extensively, for more than 10
years (I was looking at "What are the textbooks
used to teach Buddhist monks in Thailand,
in Sri Lanka, in Laos, in Cambodia, in Western
academia, everywhere?", I was looking at textbooks,
pedagogy, I was not interested in theoretical
grammar, I was interested in actual grammar,
how it's learned and taught and used in language-acquisiton,
how the language is tested, how exams are
conducted, all of those questions), everyone
you meet today who either really is a Pali
scholar or who claims to be will have learned
in the Western-influenced style. Now, if you
look at my published work, so far I have only
said bad things about this, I think, because
I was mostly talking about colonialism. And,
y'know, European colonialism in Southeast
Asia was ugly and brutal and killed people,
and burned down Buddhist temples, looted Buddhist
temples of their works-of-art, and piled up
Buddhist manuscripts and lit them on fire.
That brutality is real. What I've never talked
about (just because my career as a Pali scholar
didn't last long enough) [is that] there are
also positive elements to that very sad history.
I found a lot of obscure publications produced
in Myanmar during the first explosion of scholarly
excitement when Western technologies and Buddhist
traditions came into contact with one-another.
When, under the British Empire, in Myanmar,
in Burma, you had for the first time Pali
schools being set up (there was just one in
Rangoon) where they used a European-style
system of examinations, of textbooks, of tests
and of language-exercises, directly imitating
the way Ancient Greek was taught in Europe
(to some extent how Latin was taught in Europe).
And of course Europeans also brought the technology
of modern book-making, book-binding, so (instead
of palm-leaf manuscripts) having ink on paper
for the first time. Although my printed work,
so far, focuses almost totally on the devastating,
sad, terrible, evil aspects of European colonialism,
the positive side was that a lot of local
people said, "Wow, this is my opportunity
to publish that book I was always wanting
to publish". You know, maybe their first contact
with the technology of book-publishing. And
those impulses did not just come from the
center. For example, in Myanmar, if you look
up the name James Grey, James Grey was producing
some of the first Pali textbooks that were
European-style textbooks, you know, fill-in-the-blank
exercises, these kinds of things, modeled
on ancient Greek and Latin, and Pali exams,
coming in and writing an exam, the way we
in the modern West would think of it, so people
would prove they had learned the language.
The arrival of these methods… people didn't
respond to this as oppression, because at
that time the traditional system was still
vibrant, many people said, "Wow, this is great,
this is an opportunity, this is a new way
to learn, or a new way to prove what you've
learned". You know, traditional methods rely
much more on authoritarian relationships between
a senior monk and a younger monk, memorization…
I won't get into it, if I digress into that,
this video will be even longer. But the arrival
of those European scholars, those European
technologies-of-scholarship, technologies-of-education,
methods of pedagogy, the positive aspect of
that was (in the short term) that it touched
off a revival of scholarly interest in Pali,
within countries like Myanmar and Sri Lanka.
Now the bad news is, this was part of a colonial
regime that devastated Buddhism and devastated
local political autonomy, devastated the local
society, that led to the collapse of many
things in the culture, [there are] many bad
things to be said about it. Cambodia is sort
of an interesting exception to the rule that
confirms the rule. The history of the Institut
Bouddhique, the French Buddhist Institute
in Cambodia, has actually been written about
relatively extensively (in French, but also
in English). I think they did that mostly
out of envy, looking at what the Royal Asiatic
Society was doing in Sri Lanka and elsewhere
and they said, "Well, we have to put a respectable
face on the fact that French dominion now
controls places like Cambodia and Laos." And,
y'know, I got to see the last gasp of that
tradition when I was living in Cambodia and
Laos. Among the people who opened the doors
for me and treated me so well [were] the people
who controlled the École française d'Extrême-Orient,
that's the (literally) the French school of
studies in the Far East, in the Extreme Orient.
In Vientiane, in Laos, they were wonderful
to me, they opened the door for me, they gave
me access to all kinds of scholarly resources,
in their archives and so on. And, by contrast,
the people in the same institution in Cambodia
treated me like garbage, but hey, y'know,
it is what it is. Some of those guys talked
to me by e-mail, the guys in Phnom Penh, but,
y'know, in general, they were not interested
in talking to me in Phnom Penh, and that,
of course, reflected the fact that the particular
people, were they open to Pali scholarship,
as opposed to Sanskrit, as opposed to being
interested in archaeology, art history and
other subjects. But I got to see the end of
that tradition when I was in the former French
colonies of Southeast Asia. The work of learning
Pali is in some ways the same as any other
language and in some ways it is uniquely difficult,
and uniquely awful. You have to have incredible
motivation, incredible stamina, and incredible
focus. During the more-than-ten-years I was
involved in Pali you have no idea how many
people got in touch with me by e-mail saying,
"Yeah, I'm into this, I'm 100% committed to
this, I'm going to learn this language, I'm
going to become a scholar in this field",
and then at some point, two years later, five
years later or what-have-you, they're gone,
they drop out. And of course I can sympathize
with why. [It is an] enormous sacrifice of
your time, and as I've said to many people,
if you compare it to learning how to play
the guitar, learning how to play the guitar
is a lot easier, the rewards, socially, even
economically, are much greater, and, y'know,
people aren't going to hate you for it. People
will love you for being a legit Pali scholar
but people will also hate you, because you're
a threat to religious authority, you're a
threat to certain political assumptions. Sometimes
you're a threat to national pride. There was
a guy in Thailand (and I don't want to shout
out his name), I remember… he was based
in Bangkok, and he had connections to the
universities there, but only informal connections,
he wasn't a professor, he was just present
as a self-made scholar in Bangkok. And when
I was out in the remote North-West of Thailand,
where I was speaking Lao not Thai, I remember
I spoke to a woman who didn't seem to have
any formal education, but she cared about
Buddhism, and she said to me passionately,
she said, "You know, there's this one foreigner
in Bangkok, and he's a real scholar of Buddhism,"
(which is true, that's a reasonable compliment
to give the guy), "He's a real scholar of
Buddhism, and whenever he goes to academic
conferences in Bangkok, all the Thai scholars
have to hang their heads in shame and be silent,
because that guy, that foreigner (he's a white
man, he's a westerner), he really knows his
stuff, and the professors in the Thai universities,
they're all corrupt, and they don't know what
they're doing." That might be a slight exaggeration,
but there was a lot of truth to it; and what
shocked me was that I was standing on the
banks of the Mekong river, I was in the middle
of nowhere, and I was talking to somebody
who was not a career academic, somebody who
I believe had no university diploma at all,
and she knew this. She was in-the-loop for
this "gossip", or whatever you want to say.
So that reflects [the fact that] just existing
as someone who can offer a dissenting opinion
about history, about the language, about the
religion, that's a threat that is really felt
at the core of these very conservative, very
hierarchical institutions, in Thailand as
[the] example. And many people will say to
you, well, Thailand [is] a relatively easy-going,
open-minded culture, compared to Taiwan, compared
to Japan. You want to talk about orthodoxy,
I can tell stories about Japan, y'know, having
academic conferences where nobody's allowed
to ask any questions, getting peer review
back that says, "You dared to criticize this
other publication therefore we're not going
to publish this". You're dealing with the
most conservative and most hierarchical aspect
of these different cultures, and Sri Lanka…
tempers get really hot in Sri Lanka. In some
ways it's better than the kind of silence
imposed on Buddhist Studies in the rest of
Asia, but in Sri Lanka people will scream
at you, and I think people get into fist-fights
with you often enough, too. I say this, and
look, you know, my research is not controversial.
It shouldn't be by any reasonable standards.
If I had been working on Ancient Greek or
Latin, nothing I have to say would be considered
controversial. During the years that I was
a Pali scholar I openly identified as Buddhist.
I was fundamentally pro-Buddhist, and that
doesn't mean that I was uncritical of Buddhism.
I'm not pro-slavery, I'm not in favor of men
and women having unequal rights (I support
men and women having equal right), I support
democracy, I don't support ancient kingdoms.
None of that, I felt, disqualified me as a
Buddhist, as someone who could make a positive
contribution to the scholarship and the religion.
I considered myself an advocate for the religion.
I considered myself somebody who not only
was willing to discuss Buddhist Philosophy
and history as interesting, but really, during
those years when I was a Pali scholar, I felt
that I was somebody who could positively preach
some of that stuff. You know, propound it
in a non-objective way. All is impermanent.
Life is suffering. There is no soul. To me,
those things are still worth talking about,
they're still worth preaching and so on. And
in terms of the cultural aspect of it, all
these countries have cultural problems and
political problems, believe me, Cambodia,
Laos, Thailand, Sri Lanka, Myanmar, they got
problems. I'm not interested in rose-colored
glasses, I'm not interested in glorifying
them uncritically. But, compare them to Indonesia.
Compare them to Bangladesh. Compare them to
Communist China. I also have a lot to say
in favor of Theravada Buddhist countries,
politically, socially, culturally and so on.
In many ways I was well-suited to be a kind
of positive, uplifting advocate for this stuff.
I wasn't in a position of hostility to this
field of studies. This brings us to point
3, why did I quit? If I put in all this time,
if I gained reading comprehension in the language,
if I put in all the hours to, as I mentioned,
[develop] very good hand-writing, the ability
to not only read but write in the Burmese
tradition of Pali, the Thai, the Cambodian,
blah blah blah. [If] I put in all this time
and effort, why would I quit? Well, you know,
I remember I got on the phone with somebody,
he was a PhD candidate at the time, I don't
know if he's now finished his PhD, and he
talked to me about altruism. He said to me,
"Well, your work must be motivated by altruism."
And I said, "No", and that shocked him. I
said, look, when I was working with a charity
on the border between Laos and Myanmar, and
that charity's raison d'etre was to hand out
sacks of rice to starving people, that's altruism.
Let's not mess around. Altruism exists in
this world. On the border between Thailand
and Laos there is an orphanage to help babies
born with H.I.V./A.I.D.S. who have been abandoned
by their own parents. It's run by Christians,
not by Buddhists. It's controlled by Christian
missionaries. That's altruism. I used to talk
to Buddhists about it, and say, "How can you
leave this for Christian missionaries to do?
C'mon, these are your orphans, these are your…
you've got to organize a Buddhist alternative."
No no, [they would reply,] "Leave it for the
Christians", "bad karma", "if those babies
were born with a disability, we don't wanna
know because that's bad karma". This is the
stuff you deal with, if you really are out
there in the field, this is what you deal
with in Buddhism today. That's altruism, those
two charities I mentioned as examples are
altruism. What am I looking for? For me as
a scholar? For me as an independent intellectual?
As someone who is definitely not making money
out of Pali, out of Theravada Buddhism, out
of this language, out of these histories,
cultures, peoples, it's still not altruism.
If you put in this time and this work, what
you want back is an intellectual reward, not
a financial reward, but that intellectual
reward is still tremendously important. And
your motives, if you're honest with yourself,
are not altruistic. If you take the time to
write an academic book-review (you don't need
a PhD to do that, if you're still a student,
you can start writing book-reviews now), what's
motivating you? It shouldn't be an animus
toward the author of the original book, it
shouldn't be to try to score points by showing
that you're smarter than the book you're reviewing,
it shouldn't be anything like that. If you're
going to review a book that's out there, it
is because you want to be part of an intellectual
tradition, a discourse, a dialogue. You want
to be involved in discussing those issues,
and who do you want to discuss them with?
You want to discuss them with other people
whose opinions you respect. If you put in
the hard work to really learn Pali, to become
a Pali scholar, etc., and let's say you go
to that same conference I described earlier
where I met Richard Gombrich for the first
time: why are you going there? It's not altruism.
You're not going there to make money, either.
You're not going there on an ego trip, but
you're going because you hope to be part of
an intellectual tradition of some kind. [It
could be] a brand new intellectual tradition.
It doesn't have to be an intellectual tradition
that stretches back to more-than-2,500-years-ago
in ancient India. It can be a brand new intellectual
tradition, but you want to be discussing these
issues with other people who care about them,
with other people who know about them, with
other people whose opinion you respect. So
that's not altruism. And, what I've just said,
I think if people are really honest with themselves,
in many different areas of intellectual endeavor,
they would agree, they would say the same
thing. If you ask someone who is a Marxist,
"What motivates you to do all this hard work
about Marxism?", I'm sure many of them would
say it is because they want to be part of
this intellectual tradition, they want to
engage with other people they respect, and
so on. After so many years of being involved
with Pali, with Theravada Buddhism, after
doing everything I wanted to do, and many
things I never dreamed I would do… Look,
I never dreamed I would have the experience
of waking up on the Mekong River. I never
dreamed that the Mekong River would go from
being this tremendously distant, exotic place
to being a mode of transport for me, taking
these small wooden boats up and down the Mekong
river. I never thought I'd meet Bhikkhu Bodhi
in his current location in the United States.
I never thought I would sleep under the same
roof where Bhikkhu Bodhi used to live, where
he became famous, the forest hermitage in
Sri Lanka. I never thought I'd see any of
that stuff, I never thought I'd do that stuff,
I never thought I'd meet those people. I never
thought I'd be able to see the kind of ancient
artifacts I saw… wonderful. I'd done it
all, but what was missing was exactly this
question of an intellectual tradition, of
having colleagues you respect. And, again,
you know, I've mentioned that within Western
academia there were all kinds of people who
appreciated my work, and who were positive
and encouraged me… because I mentioned Stanford
by name, I'll use that as the example. You
know, Stanford, they said, "Yeah, okay, you
can come here and get a PhD", and there are
details, obviously, about how the application
goes, blah blah blah, but the reality was
that if I had gone to Stanford all of my colleagues
would have been Tibetan specialists. Tibetan
Buddhism, Tibetan language, Tibetan history.
That's not my tradition. I don't want to be
a part of that. I don't want to talk about
that. I don't hate Tibet, but look at a map,
Tibet and Thailand are remarkably far apart.
And, you know, there may be some wonderful
scholars of Tibetan Buddhism, Tibetan History,
Tibetan Politics, at Stanford or at other
universities. I don't want anything to do
with that. You know, I've got to be honest
with myself about that. After a number of
years not just being in the game but seeing
so much directly, hands-on, visiting so many
universities in person (not just reading about
them on the internet), and, you know, in terms
of reading, I wasn't just reading ancient
[texts], I was reading all the new academic
literature that comes out, there aren't that
many decent journals, there's not that much
to read, sadly. But, you know, I started at
the University of Toronto that still had an
excellent library built up by A.K. Warder
(and I met A.K. Warder!), you know, these
guys left behind their books. After getting
this incredibly thorough survey, I had to
admit to myself, there is no tradition today
for me to be a part of, and I can't create
a tradition out of nothing. And I can't do
this totally alone. I'm a Canadian citizen.
Come back to Canada. Is there any way I can
study Pali in Canada? Is there any way I can
study modern Burmese in Canada? Is there any
way I would be able to work on… Long story
short: no. I could have ended on a positive
note, instead the positivity is at the beginning
of this video. So, if you want to cheer yourself
up, hit play again, go back to the start,
and hear how wonderful my life was as a Pali
scholar. Because there were a lot of wonderful
things about it. With nothing but a backpack,
a bicycle, and a lot of hard work, I went
everywhere, I did everything, I lived my dream.
When that dream was over, I had to look at
the reality of the tradition as it exists
today and say, "I can't be a part of it".
Is that a happy ending or a sad ending? Can't
it be both?